August the 7th, I believe it is, which is Guadalcanal Day, 59 years ago today.
Test yours.
Testing 1, 2, 3, 4.
August 7, we're in the Dean's Conference Room, Room 101, Veterinary Medicine, and a third interview with Dr. J.D.
McCready.
Dr. McCready, when we quit the second interview, we were somewhere in the 1980s.
By then, you had become involved in a wide variety of special programs.
What led you to become so committed to the broadening of the program in veterinary medicine?
Well, I think the major impact on my life was my postdoctoral training in the Texas Medical Center, which is the largest medical center in the world.
It has two medical schools, VA hospital, dental school, cancer center,
Center for Religion, Center for Everything, Nursing.
And that center was so dynamic and so many things were happening and the people were such futuristic individuals as far as their thinking that being engrossed in that environment for a number of years, in fact,
still hold faculty appointments at MD Anderson and at Baylor College of Medicine and still frequent the facilities and have contact with the faculty.
But to see the dynamics of that center and the type of people they brought in, also to see medicine changing so rapidly from a very
archaic, we would think now, to the technology input we were seeing now hour by hour rather than year by year.
When I came back, I thought, and I had the support of the Medical Center faculty, our leadership, and Dr. Butler, the president of Baylor College of Medicine,
and Dr. LaMater, president of MD Anderson.
Having those people backing and wanting to have a relationship with Texas A.M.
University, particularly because of veterinary medicine,
They were instrumental in my desires to see our college elevate itself to the status of those two major institutions in the Texas Medical Center.
And so that impacted my thinking as to
and my actions through that period of time.
And fortunately, I had a dean at that time that was very, very supportive, very, very good at delegating and letting people do their own thing, and that was Dr. George Shelton.
No, who?
George Shelton.
Oh, yes.
I didn't hear Dr. Shelton's last name.
Who else on the faculty in veterinary medicine was also active in working with other medical
components?
Well, you have to look at our college and its origin.
And I think, as I pointed out in our last interview, we had about seven or eight people that built the foundation for the college.
And I mentioned those, Dr. Miller, Dr. Leonard, Dr. Turk, Dr. Burns, Dr. Jaggi, and Dr. Smith, and that group.
And they were still, they were active up until the 70s.
But they built an academic veterinary medicine that has turned out to build into probably one of the better schools in the country.
But with that foundation and teaching being their main interest,
Once we had built a teaching faculty, and I felt strongly about having a good teaching faculty, then we were able, through increased enrollment in our undergraduate program in biomedical science and doubling of our veterinary
the student body, the development of graduate degrees and programs.
Then we were able to justify additional faculty, which we could point toward research and the technology development that was on the horizon.
So through those people such as, and we didn't have lots, I mean, to start out with.
I know the first chair we had and the first person I brought in of that caliber, well, not necessarily the first one, but was Dr. Steve Safe, whose record speaks for itself, Dr. Dwayne Kramer, certainly, and of course one of the real first
scholars in a way scholar would have been Dr. Hilton Smith who wrote the textbook on veterinary pathology.
But with that base we began to add more and more faculty.
Dr. Jim Womack came in from our Institute of Comparative Medicine and slowly we began to add outstanding people so that now we have
people that have been selected to the National Academy of Science and many other awards and international recognition and research, NIH research centers have been established and things of that nature.
Of the many programs that you worked on that involved collaboration,
Which ones were the most important and which ones were the most enjoyable?
Well, and we mentioned this a bit before, but starting out really with Dr. Stanley Olson, the president of Baylor,
and his desire to set up an Institute of Comparative Medicine, that beginning in the late 60s, set a precedent.
It brought, when he and I came to A&M to talk to the Executive Committee about establishing such a relationship,
with these very fine faculty department heads we had, they were very supportive of us setting up that institute.
And so we began to put it together.
We were able to get, with the support of Dr. Olson and Dr. DeBakey, them to carry this
item to Austin for funding and we received funding for the Institute of Comparative Medicine.
And then off of that we built many, many research programs and interrelated programs.
Coming out of that was the development of our medical school here, which was to have clinical science relationship to the Texas Medical Center.
And also the Institute of Biological Sciences and Technology, an 11-story building we built at the Shamrock Hilton site in Houston.
And just program after program,
with collaboration again with the medical center in Houston and then later with other medical centers and the development of the medical school at the Texas A&M and then Texas A&M began to grow and it took on a dental school of its own and we put together a nursing school for Prairie View in Houston and
All this thing evolved back to this initial contact in the 60s with the Baylor College of Medicine.
The deans of veterinary medicine have been very critical to all of this.
You began your academic service here with Al Price.
Dean, didn't you?
Well, I guess maybe the first year or so was Dr. Armistead.
Oh, okay.
And then Dr. Price.
Then Dr. Shelton.
Dr. Shelton.
And I believe we talked about his selection and how he was selected.
How do you think the faculty in general felt about Dr. Shelton as the dean?
Well, I thought Dr. Shelton was, had a good rapport with the faculty.
He never, in other words, he never tried to
to force programs or such as that onto the faculty.
He always worked with them in a very, oh, using his department heads.
At that time, we had seven or eight people on the executive committee, and he used them as a sounding board and really did not
try to force any programs or changes into the college that were not approved and accepted by the executive committee and the faculty.
And so he worked closely with them.
And as I said, he was always, his office was always open.
He always was there to help you if you needed help, if you needed resources, if you needed
contact on campus to try to promote a program.
So he was just a very, very gentle man and very helpful, I think.
And the executive committee during those years was made up of the department heads?
The department heads, and we had also the director of the Texas Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory, the assistant deans, our assistants to the deans eventually became associate deans, director of clinics.
We must have had 12, 15 people on the executive committee.
And they normally met once a week?
Once a week, usually for about a half day.
During those years, the 70s, 80s, the department head was not expected to submit everything, every recommendation or decision to a vote of the faculty, that the department head was expected to
to make a decision that that individual thought was best.
Is that right?
Oh, that's right.
We didn't have selection committees for faculty or any other positions.
The department head pretty well recruited, usually would bring in the individual being recruited to visit with the faculty to try to sell them on the department.
and the program, but never were committees or votes taken or anything like that.
Do you remember during those years, do you remember any faculty member prospects that got away that in hindsight wished, A&M wished they could have gotten?
You know, I've thought about that many times.
I think that
I know I can speak mainly to my department.
I don't think there's anyone that we ever recruited that we did not get.
Now, the way that I did recruit faculty, I went to all the major scientific meetings in the country each year to observe young graduates
students as they gave papers and seminars etc and so I kept a backlog of people that I would like to recruit and whenever we had a vacancy or an opening I would I would go back through my list people that had impressed me and invite them for a visit to the campus
And when we did that, of course we went through, they met, they met the dean and they met our fellow faculty people in the department and they were well received and then they were taken over to the university to the
administrative officers there, and then Haskell Monroe or somebody else like him would spend time with these individuals, an hour or so sometimes, going over the growth of the university and everything that was good about it.
And then, normally these visits were about two-day faculty visits, and then
The way I, I never made a faculty member an offer.
After we hosted them for a period of couple days, when they left, I always said, if you're interested in Texas A&M University, you write me a letter stipulating what you would want in the way of salary,
research space, startup dollars, and what have you.
I never gave them a salary level.
I never gave them startup dollar levels or anything, because I knew that if I was way off, that they would not be happy.
And so I let them come back to me with a salary and start up funds.
And if it was such that we couldn't cover that amount, I frankly told them so.
In some instances, they came in too low, and so I would increase the amount.
But I always let them tell me what it would require.
And then I would go to the administration and try to fulfill that requirement.
And this way, they, when they came, they got what they wanted, I suppose.
What were, as you recall, those years of being a recruiter, what were the
biggest obstacles Texas A&M Veterinary Medicine had in recruiting faculty here?
Well, that you have to look over a period of time.
For example,
Uh, our department, when I came back, took our department, I think we only had three people in the department.
And so we had, uh, eventually went to thirty-something people plus seventy graduate students over a period of time.
But when I first started recruiting faculty in, uh, and sixty, mid-sixties,
When we had them come to visit, we didn't even have a hotel or a place for them to live or to stay.
We didn't have any housing ready built for them as a rule.
So it was quite difficult.
The recruiting environment was not real good.
In fact, in those days, we couldn't even use state funds to recruit them.
And so lots of that had to come out of our own pocket.
I finally got the former students association to put money at the department level.
Dr. Jack Knox was the president of the former students, one of our graduates.
And I got him to put in so much for her department.
And we finally got some flexible dollars we could use a bit when we were recruiting.
But it was a tough, it was a, you had to do lots of planning to set up a recruiting visit, to say the least.
Was the, by comparison, was the, in those years, the community being small, was that a greater handicap than the institution?
Was the institution's reputation better than the community's?
Well, one thing in recruiting in veterinary medicine that was somewhat in our favor of being a small community and a fairly large agricultural college or university is that most, if you look at most veterinary colleges, they're all located in very small communities.
I mean except like in Philadelphia and a few places, but therefore that was, they were not surprised by the kind of rural environment to which they were coming.
In those early years, if you were going to take them to eat in an upscale
restaurant.
Where did you take them?
Well, we didn't have but one, and that was the Texan, I guess, and it was kind of a unique little place, but we just didn't have any restaurants or, or hotels.
We had a little place called, well, the Agland Inn had three rooms in it, I think, and MSC had about
I had about 10, and then they had the Bluebird courts, and that was about it.
And very, it was a difficult situation, to say the least.
All right, back to the deans.
Dr. Shelton retired in the... I think Dr. Shelton must have retired in about, let's see, about 80, 88, or...
something like that.
I can't remember exactly.
And as far as you're aware, did the veterinary public in Texas feel positively about his years here?
I think so.
As I say, he was such a
easy individual to work with, and he worked with the various commodity groups in agriculture and worked well with the university administration.
He just did not ruffle any feathers.
Did you ever know of him losing his temper or getting mad?
I don't remember him ever getting upset at me.
I don't even remember anybody else.
I know he had plenty of reason to be upset at me from time to time because I was involved in so many activities outside the college.
and throughout the state.
And it was, it was not my intent, but I didn't include him in all of these activities many times until after the fact.
But he never, never was upset about it.
He just simply said, where can I help?
Then when, when he retired,
there was a search, and weren't you one of the people seriously considered in that search?
Well, in that search, I was selected by 85 percent of the faculty, but...
There was an overnight change in the administration in the College of Agriculture, and the counselor was fairly new.
And in order to get the dean of agriculture, the dean of agriculture said he had to bring his own animal man.
And so I was essentially removed from that.
It turned out better for me in the long run.
My experiences were broad and things went lots better and they brought in a very
qualified individual as dean and one that had... That's Dr. Shattuck.
Dr. John Shattuck.
And he had, he had a good vision of research and came at a time when he, being friends to the Chancellor of Agriculture and Dean of Agriculture, and we needed new facilities badly,
He had their full support since they were friends before the fight.
Who was that ag dean and vice chancellor?
Well, the chancellor was Perry Atkins and Charlie Arntzen.
Arntzen, okay.
They had been at Illinois together.
Where was Shattuck immediately before coming here?
I think probably at Illinois.
Okay.
I think.
Now, Dean Gage had been one of the key members of Dean Shelton's staff.
Right.
He was the associate dean, is that right?
And is it correct that he kind of directed the day-to-day, I mean, hour-to-hour?
Yeah.
He was the chief of staff.
Would that be a good?
I think so, and that's where he moved to in the university administration, too, as senior vice president, and very well organized.
I was chairman of the search committee that selected Dean to come as associate dean.
And so, and I had known him as a student.
And so, he's very, he's articulate, well organized, and did well at the university level too.
When he left the college, who became the kind of chief of staff?
Who kind of took on the task that he had?
Oh, I can't remember the individual's name.
We finally divided the activities there in the office so that we had kind of a dean or associate dean for academics and associate dean for research.
And there were various individuals that came along that filled those positions.
None of them, under Dr. Shattuck, the positions were essentially not functional because he, unlike Dr. Shelton, did not delegate.
And so he carried all of this himself.
Describe as much as you can
the search process for the dean in which you were part, where there was a search committee.
Yeah.
And what did you and the other nominees, what did you all go through?
Well, I guess it's a pretty standard procedure.
We each were
brought in and toured through and oversaw the budgets and met all the people on campus.
About how many nominees, I mean finalists, were there?
Oh, I think there were probably three or four.
Were you the only local?
Oh, no, I think not.
I can't remember that exactly.
But Dr. Shattuck was not in the mix in that search.
It was an after-the-fact thing that occurred.
As far as you know, did the search committee make a recommendation?
Oh, yeah, the search committee made their recommendation.
Did they recommend you?
Yes, and then even after the other gentleman was selected, they sent a petition forward to that
that they wanted me to serve as their dean.
But again, things worked out so well.
So you went back to what you had been, all these many activities.
Were you still the department head?
I was, I remained department head for a year or so, but had been asked to resign.
And so I did so and followed another career.
How, how was that request made?
Was it, did the dean call you in or?
Oh, there were lots of things, and I think it's probably better.
I wouldn't want to.
Okay.
You want to leave for it?
Oh, no.
No, I just don't.
Okay.
No, that's fine.
It doesn't help me to, as I say, that he was very articulate, very astute, very intelligent, very dynamic, very active person, and I think he
He came at a good time, and he was able to acquire more resources than I could have required.
Now, he remained as dean until about— I think he was dean about five or six years, probably.
Then he—did he leave?
Retire?
Nobody knows all of the circumstances involved in why Dr. Shattuck left.
We know that he did take a job with private sector.
And then the interim dean and what's his first name?
Bob Plater, Robert Plater.
Was he a local faculty member?
Yes, he was.
He had been head of the small animal clinics and I guess maybe had functioned as a associate dean for clinics.
I'm not real sure.
I can't remember the sequence.
Was it generally understood that he would be only the interim?
Yes, he left here as head of our small animal clinic and went to Cornell to help them build their, he had built our clinic, was here under the construction of our small animal clinic, and he went to Cornell to help them develop a new clinic, and then he was hired back here as a social dean, I think, something like that.
All right, then the search that led to Richard Adams.
Describe that as far as your... Well, I essentially, in 1991, I was, I moved from the College of Veterinary Medicine.
And... To where?